Add “Compile GPU kernels using ClangIR” Blog Post (GSoC 2024) (#53)
llvm/llvm-blog-www: content/posts/2024-08-29-gsoc-opencl-c-support-for-clangir.md

---
author: "Zhi Ma (7mile)"

> date: "2024-08-29"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: "2024-09-09"
```

tags: ["GSoC", "OpenCL", "ClangIR"]
title: "GSoC 2024: Compile GPU kernels using ClangIR"
---

Hello everyone! I'm 7mile. My GSoC project this summer is [Compile GPU kernels using ClangIR](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/clangir-compile-gpu-kernels-using-clangir/76984). It's been an exciting journey in compiler development, and I'm thrilled to share the progress and insights gained along the way here.

# Background

[The ClangIR project](https://github.com/llvm/clangir) aims to establish a new IR for Clang, built on top of MLIR. As part of the ongoing effort to support heterogeneous programming models, this project focuses on integrating OpenCL C language support into ClangIR. The ultimate goal is to enable the compilation of GPU kernels written in OpenCL C into LLVM IR targeting the SPIR-V architecture, laying the groundwork for future enhancements in SYCL and CUDA support.

# What We Did

Our work involved several key areas:

> 1. **Address Space Support**: One of the fundamental tasks was teaching ClangIR to handle address spaces, a vital feature for languages like OpenCL. Initially, we considered mimicking LLVM's approach, but this proved inadequate for ClangIR's goals. After thorough discussion and an RFC, we implemented a unified address space design that aligns with ClangIR's objectives, ensuring a clean and maintainable code structure.

Reviewer 2: > After thorough discussion and an RFC

Maybe you could add a link to the mentioned RFC?

6. **Calling Conventions**: We adjusted the calling conventions in ClangIR to align with SPIR-V requirements, migrating from the default `cdecl` to SPIR-V-specific conventions like `SpirKernel` and `SpirFunction`. This also enables most OpenCL built-in functions like `barrier` and `get_global_id`.

7. **User Experience Enhancements**: Finally, we ensured that the end-to-end kernel compilation experience using ClangIR was smooth and intuitive, with minimal manual intervention required.

# Results

The project successfully met its primary goals. OpenCL kernels from the Polybench-GPU benchmark suite can now be compiled using ClangIR into LLVM IR for SPIR-V. All patches have been merged into the main ClangIR repository, and the project’s progress has been well-documented in the [overview issue](https://github.com/llvm/clangir/issues/689). I believe the work not only advanced OpenCL support but also laid a solid foundation for future enhancements, such as SYCL and CUDA support in ClangIR.

> We have successfully compiled and passed all 20 OpenCL C test cases from the [polybenchGpu](https://github.com/sgrauerg/polybenchGpu) repository. Please refer to our [artifact evaluation repository](https://github.com/seven-mile/clangir-ocl-ae) for detailed instructions on how to experiment with our work.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have successfully compiled and executed all 20 OpenCL C benchmarks from the [polybenchGpu](https://github.com/sgrauerg/polybenchGpu) repository, passing the built-in result validation. Please refer to our [artifact evaluation repository](https://github.com/seven-mile/clangir-ocl-ae) for detailed instructions on how to experiment with our work.
```
"pass" is a bit unspecific, you should highlight that you can actually run the kernels!
